1) Hypervisors
--------------

 - Native: runs base metal
 - Hosted: runs as an application, access host services via syscalls

CPU has no notion of virtualized environment, some instruction must be emulated.
For example if a guest modify the register that points to page table it also
modifies the host state.

Ring deprivileging is nedded.
Running kernel guest at ring 1 is the most used (013 model).
Running kernel guest at ring 3 (033 model) is too close to emulation, costly.

Ring 1 has not access to all instructions. Ring 1 is also buggy, some
instruction that should not be allowed in ring 1 are allowed.
popf for example always succeed at ring 1, so interrupts can be disabled from
guest.

The VMM must be able which guest kernel generated a trap.
The VMM must virtualize interrupts.
The VMM must manage the frequest access of guest to privileged resources.

In x86_64 we have harware assisted virtualization, in x86 is all at software
level.

2) Ring Aliasing
----------------

Some instructions generate an exception if not at ring 0.
E.g. hlt, lidt, lgdt, invd, mox crX ...

The genrated trap must be handled by the VMM.

Those instruction can be replaced lifting the bytecode and recompiling.

Guest context has two modes:
 - Raw mode: native guest runs ar ring 1 or 3
 - Hypervisor: VMM at ring 0 execute code

Host context is the execution context for userspace portions of the VMM.
 - The running thread of the VM run in this context upon a mode change.
 - 

3) Paravirtualization
---------------------

VMM offers a virtual interface avaiable to guests: hypercalls.

To run privileged instructions the guests, when it knows that is running
virtualized, runs hypercalls.

4) Hardware Assisted
--------------------

Intel Vanderpool Technology, VT-x, eliminates the need of software based
virtualization.

Solved problems: Ring comrpession, non-trapping instructions (popf) and
excessive trapping.

Virtual Machine Extension define the support for VMs on x86 using VMX
operations.

Kinds of VMX operations:
 - root: VMM runs here
 - non-root: Gest runs here

This eliminated ring deprivileging for guests.
VM Entry is the transition to VMX non-root operation, VM Exit is the transition
to root operation. Registers and address space are swapped in one atomic
operation!

VMX Root is a special ring, all priviledges of rings 0 plus the possibility to
switch VMX operations. Now also guests runs at ring 0.

VMCS (Virtual Machine Constrol Structure) is a data structure used to manage
VMX non-root operation and transitions. 

  - Guest state area, saved CPU state
  - Host state area
  - VM execution control fields, for example which core expose to VM
  - VM exit control fields
  - VM entry control fields
  - VM exit information fields, read-only fields that describe the reason of a
    VM exit (like guets crash)

First generation VT-x forces TLB flushes each VMX transitions.

Now there is the VPID, a 16-bit virtual processor ID field in VMCS.
In TLB linear translations are cached with VPID so TLB entries of different VMs
can coexists in the TLB.

Virtual Address Space -> Physical Address Space (Virtual RAM) ->
Machine Address Space (RAM).

Also physical address spaces are virtual for guests.

To handle this additional translation there are several options:

 - Shadow Page Table, map guest-virtual pages to machine pages directly.
   This page table id read-only, when the guest change it a trap is generated.
   This is done to synchronize guest page table with shadow page table.
   There is a virtual CR3. When guest change the virtual CR3, the real CR3 will
   points to the corrispondent shadow page table.

 - Nested/Extended Page Table, translate physiscal address in VMX non-root using
   and intermediate set of tables. Very costly TLB miss.

5) Kernel Samepage Merging
--------------------------

COW is traditionally used to share physiscal frames. Between virtual machines,
save space in this way is difficult.

KSM exposes the /dev/ksm pseudofile, with ioctl calls programmers can register
portions of address spaces.

Windows guests writes 0 in newly allocated pages and this is a watse of pages.

Registering the VMM to KSM all pages are scanned and hashed, when an hash
collide they are mapped to a physical frame and COW protected.


